1. Why have previous germline mutation rate studies been relatively unreliable and restricted to small taxa? What strategy does the current study employ to address this?

GMR estimation studies have been previously focused on mostly humans and primates due to both heterogeneity in the methodology developed for obtaining these estimates and the lack of availability of a high-quality dataset spanning a wide phylogeny. This study attempts to describe germline mutation rates within species across many taxa using a singular, trio-based approach.



2. Male-to-female ratios of germline mutation contribution variation between species has been previously estimated through genomic sequence divergence comparison. Why could this be unreliable and what is the approach presented in this paper? Does this address these concerns?

Genome-wide sequence divergence analysis might capture differences in evolutionary pressure reflected in autosomal and X chromosomal evolution. The example in the paper - stronger selection on the X leading to reduced divergence - would result in an increased male mutation bias that would be mistakenly attributed to male germline mutation bias. Phylogenetic branch-spanning effects might also constitute a confounder. In contrast, this study estimates male-to-female mutation ratios directly, by identifying germline de novo mutations within trios.



3. What are the main drivers of male-biased mutation rates and how would a change in each of these drivers affect mutation rates?

The two factors driving mutation rate variation are generation time and parental age at reproduction. Increases in the former would lead to an accumulation of mutations due to prolonged DNA damage, both directly and due to increased cell divisions during gametogenesis. For the latter, increased age is associated with an increase of de novo germline mutation incidence, especially in males.



4. What patterns of variation in the male germline mutation bias can you observe (also look at Fig. 1.c) and how is it interpreted by the authors in mammals and birds, respectively? What are the implications for the differences in mutation bias between these and reptiles+fishes?

Mammals and birds show a relatively strong male mutation bias, whereas reptiles and fishes do not (Fig. 1.c), while their overall mutation rates do not differ significantly from those within other groups (Fig. 1.a). While generation time variation could translate into the differences observed within mammals, the authors argue that the relatively small differences between species might be driven by accumulation of DNA damage in species with longer generation times. In birds, the large male bias seen in some groups seems to be correlated with the amplitude of some phenotypes associated with male reproductive competition. Unlike mammals and birds, in which spermatogenesis is constantly active, seasonal breeders like most reptiles and fishes along with a potential increase in oogenesis in the latter might explain the reduced male bias observed in these groups due to decreased gametogenesis imbalance.



5. Reptiles and fishes also show increased proportions of mutations shared among siblings. Why might this be the case? Present the authors' view and think of any potential additional contributors.

The authors argue that the observed increase in shared mutations within groups that showcase reduced male germline mutation bias might have arisen due to germline mutations originating in two different development stages - prior to primordial germline specification (and independent of parental sex), and following specification, wherein males would typically start accumulating additional mutations in male-biased groups due to increased gametogenesis discrepancies between sexes. A potential alternative explanation in fishes would be the greatly increased offspring output leading to a higher expected proportion of shared mutations.



6. What are the main assumptions underlying the yearly mutation rate model? How can the correlation between this modelled yearly mutation rate and substitution rate be interpreted?

Yearly mutation rate estimates were modelled as a baseline mutation load along with a weighted age-specific parental effect. A significant correlation between the two would imply that the mutation rate might contribute to an increased incidence of fixed substitutions, hinting at potential advantageous effects.



7. How is the viability of the drift-barrier hypothesis explored? How would you interpret the results in the paper and what caveats are discussed?

Effective population size is shown to be negatively correlated with the modelled per-generation mutation rate, suggesting that smaller populations could be more reliant on adaptation driven by increased per-generation mutation rates, which is consistent with the drift-barrier hypothesis. However, potential generation time fluctuation across evolutionary time could affect both Ne and male germline mutation bias, and an effect of shifts in generation time could be reflected in both Ne and mutation rate, inflating the observed negative correlation.



8. Why is the yearly mutation rate increased in domesticated species? Why is there a significant increase in µ_yearly, but not in µ_yearly_modelled?

An increase in the yearly mutation rate of domesticated species is most likely linked to strong selection for reduced generation times. This is reflected in an increase in µ_yearly, but not in µ_yearly_modelled, as the former does not account for parental age-specific effects upon the germline mutation rate.